<div style='page-break-after: always; break-after: always;'></div>
# Appendix K: William James Sidis

###### The overlooked genius

## The Man

The topic of Newton’s 2nd <u>law</u>, time,  and the <u>nature</u> or reality includes quite a <u>number</u> of philosophers, great thinkers, and scientists, but omitted from that list is perhaps one of the greatest thinks of our time, a man few have ever heard of; <u>William James Sedis</u>.

William, born April 1st, 1898, is considered the greatest child prodigy in recorded history.  His father, Boris, was a Ukrainian Jew and merchant who left the Ukraine for New York City after he served his 2 year prison sentence in a ~20 square foot <u>cell</u> for the crime of teaching peasants how to read and write, and, of course, the Tsarist regime’s encouragement of murdering Jews in general.  Boris, along with the thousands of other poor and struggling immigrants of New York City’s Lower East Side, scrapped out a miserable <u>existence</u>, but never lost site of his goal to become a doctor.  It was there that Boris met his wife, Sarah, also a Russian Jewish immigrant.  Not surprisingly, Boris was an atheist and rejected all traditional forms of <u>religion</u> and pedagogy, including Freudian psychology and the manners of education and their institutionalized diplomas and intelligences tests, calling them “silly, pedantic, and grossly misleading”.  

Sarah’s own ambitions required she first have a high school diploma, which she considered a near impossible task as she only had a 6th grade education.  Boris tutored her in his own manner, showing her how to apply the first three proof from Euclid’s “The Elements” (c. 300 BC), and the the manner of deduction using that.  With that alone she was able to pass her high school equivalency <u>math</u> test and was eventually accepted into Boston University.  Boris received a scholarship from the J. P. Morgan Fund.  Together, Boris and Sarah quickly advanced in their fields and became close friends with the leading thinks of the day.  One of these friends was William James, the great philosopher and “Father of American Psychology”, who once asked Sarah “If they call me a gebius, what superlative do they reserve for you husband?”





While Sarah was qualified to practice <u>medicine</u>, she never became a doctor, choosing instead to dedicate her time to being a mother after they had their son, who was named after their dear friend, as she and Boris both believed that parental involvement in child rearing was one of the most important elements of <u>intelligence</u> later in <u>life</u>.  From the day he was conceived, William’s <u>intelligence</u> was always a consideration and always supported.  This nurturing along with the <u>nature</u> of the fact that he was born of extremely intelligent parents, is why he was feeding himself at 8 months and reading the New York Times by 18 months.  Part of this nurturing process was shared by Sarah:

> Avoid punishment in all ways possible as it is the first cause of fear.  Try not say “don’t”. Instead say why what you say is so.  Awaken curiosity; it is the key to learning.  Never fail to answer.  Never put off your child’s questions. Never <u>force</u> your child to learn nor judge his ability to learn by adult standards.  Implant <u>ideas</u> at bedtime just before sleep.  Suggestions made then will make a solid impression.  Never lie to you child or use evasions. Refrain from showing him off.



At age 4 he learned Greek and, as a birthday gift to his father that same year, also taught himself Latin.  By age 8 he had written four books on various subject, including astronomy, anatomy, and the grammar of an new <u>language</u> called *vendergoot* which William had a hand in creating.  His weakest subject was <u>math</u>, but Boris applied the same techniques he used with Sarah, which allowed her to cover 6 years of <u>math</u> in 3 weeks.  Soon, William was a proficient in <u>math</u> as he was in all other subjects.  His displayed savant-like abilities in <u>math</u> and <u>numbers</u>, being able to instantly know the day on which any day in history occurred, but unlike a savant, who typically have a general <u>intelligence</u> of an imbecile, Williams general <u>intelligence</u> was off the charts.  <u>Albert Einstein</u> had an IQ of 160.  William’s IQ iwas estimated to be between 250 and 300  (*Note: Many experts believe that ratings over 160 quickly become meaningless*).  

The pre-newage, progressive parenting philosophy of William’s parents did have some drawbacks.  Because she did not want to <u>force</u> William to learn, he was enrolled in a regular school, which was a very odd decision.  On the other hand, he had to learn how to tolerate the seemingly endless boredom of school, an equally dreadful lesson for geniuses and morons alike.   But his suffering was shorter that the other’s as he was accepted to Harvard at age 12.  He was ready at age 9, but Harvard would not accept him at that age.  He occupied himself during this 3-year wait by checking Einstein’s Theory of Relativity for errors and learning foreign languages.

Sadly for William, Harvard was a disappointment.  He was treated as a misfit yet shown off like a prize horse.  His lack of social graces and athletic abilities, both of which his father detested, did not endear him to the well-heeled anti-Semitic aristocracy of Harvard.  To make matters worse, his father published a essay “Philistine and Genius”, 1909, wherein he predicts the coming of WWI, the fall of Europe, the scourge of the Red menace.  He warns of the the <u>evil</u> of a growing State authority, industrial greed, the war machine, the dumbing-down of the people due to the education system, the injustice of the justice systems, etc.  His essay starts with the premise that “What you [the reader] want is not the training of philistines, but the education of genius.”, and is as insightful into the problems the words faces today as it was then, if not more so.  Consequently, the media and intelligentsia, which was funded by the same powers then as they are today, rained down criticism on him.  In modern parlance, he was “canceled” and his <u>ideas</u> were labeled as “conspiracy theories”, “fake news” and “disinformation”.   As Sarah described:

> Boris pulled down upon his stout head had upon Bill, who was so very young, the anger that comes from hurt pride, and educators, psychologists, editorial writers, newspaper readers, were furious with him, and their fury was a factor in Billy’s <u>life</u> upon which we had not counted.

To add to his tarnished image, we was arrest for inciting a riot in Roxbury, MA, when the socialist workers demonstrated against the textile worker’s conditions.  The conflict between the crown and teh police tuned violent, ending in two police killed and many demonstrators badly beaten.  William was arrested as an inciter and for assaulting a police officer, and was sentenced to 18 months in jail, but before he could appeal, claiming he was innocent on both counts, his parents “kidnapped” (his words) him in <u>order</u> to protect him from jail by putting him in a New Hampshire sanatorium for one year.  This marked the break between William and his father.     Perhaps his genius allowed to make sense of such a claim, or perhaps he was being a typical rebellious 21-year old when saying stupid things is a way of <u>life</u>, genius or not.  In the battle between genius and hormones, hormones always wins.

William became the butt of many cruel jokes intended to humiliate him.  This went so far to to involve girls from Rutgers who would pretend to flirt with him simply to make fun of his social awkwardness or write fake lover letter proposing marriage.  This humiliation was all the more effective as never understood he was being made a fool of. Rumors and stories meant to further ostracize hims were spread, such as, that he had recurrent nervous breakdowns, that he was deathly ill, and that he was loosing his eye-sight due to over-studying.  In fact, other that a case of flu, William was never ill, never wore glasses, and never studied, at least not in the tradition sense, as did not not believe that rote learning was of any value,.  For William, learning was a form of playing.  

The hell that was Harvard did not dissuade William from entering Harvard Graduate School to study <u>law</u>, but after he was physically threatened, he decided he would take a position at Price University in Texas.   It was also here that he write his speculative yet scholarly <u>work</u> on Newton’s 2nd Law, titled “The Animate and Inanimate”.  This brilliant piece of <u>work</u> received no public attention, mainly due to the fact that William was being presented as an unhinged anti-establishment boy-wonder that had burned out and never achieved any greatest in the accepted arenas of the day.  While William continued to write, he refused to publish under his own name given the stain and prejudice that the media had placed on it, but publishers refused to publish under his pen name, as they knew it was his name that would sell book, not the content. 

William come to the conclusion that the only way to <u>life</u> a perfect <u>life</u> is to live in solitude, and with this decision he disappeared from the spotlight.  He took on menial jobs and hid identify.  He would later say that “The very sight of a mathematical formula makes me physically ill.  All I want to do is run an adding machine, but they won’t let me alone.”

William’s last public appearance was in 1937 when he unsuccessfully sued the *New Yorker* for invasion of privacy[^365].  This loss marked a precedent in privacy <u>law</u>, as the judge ruled that that once a person is a public figure, they’re always a public figure (vlogger take note).  

To this day the genus of William James Sidis is ignored, eclipsed by the same bottom-feeding yellow journalism that poisoned <u>society</u> 100 years ago, as evidenced by this *New Yorker* description of the article that William sued teh *New Yorker* over in 1937:[^364]

> Reminiscent story of William James Sidis, the boy genius who at the age of 11 lectured on the Fourth Dimension at a gathering of about 100 professors & advanced students of mathematics from Harvard University. At the age of 16 he entered Harvard Law School. He attended <u>law</u> school quitely for three years, but his main interest was mathematics. In 1919, he took part in a Communistic demonstration in Roxbury and was arrested for inciting to riot. While out on bail, he disappeared. Since then he has been working as a clerk for a salary not large enough to subsist him. In 1926, he got out a volume on the collection of streetcar transfers. He has a collection of about 1,600 of them. Today he is living in a hall bedroom of Boston's shabby end, working as a clerk in a business house. Sidis died July 17, 1944. This <u>information</u> from a reader who was doing research on him. She telephoned first on Jan. 24 & then on the 25th, 1990.

## The Book

The book we are referring to is title “The Animate and Inanimate”, and is, in the opinion of many, his greatest <u>work</u>.  It was published in 1920, when he was 21, which means it was published while he was in the sanatorium.  Whether it was written there, or written earlier when he more involved with academia, in unknown (to me).

In essence, this book is this speculative, unprovable theory of the reversibility of the Universe, and therefore, the <u>laws</u> of motion, entropy, and time.  William was hesitant to publish this <u>work</u>, but was moved to after discovering the the following quote of Lord Kelvin:

> It is conceivable that animal <u>life</u> might have the attribute of using the heat of surrounding matter, at its natural temperature, as a source of <u>energy</u> for mechanical effect . . . . The influence of animal or vegetable <u>life</u> on matter is infinitely beyond the range of any scientific enquiry hitherto entered on. Its power of directing the motions of moving particles, in the demonstrated daily miracle of our human free-will, and in the growth of generation after generation of plants from a single <u>seed</u>, are infinitely different from any possible result of the fortuitous concurrence of <u>atoms</u>. **~Lord Kelvin**

In other words, the existance of <u>life</u> breaks the 2nd <u>law</u> of <u>thermodynamics</u> or at least appears to, ergo, there must be some invisible <u>force</u> that the 2nd <u>law</u> of termodynamics does nto apply to, similar in <u>concept</u> to to James Maxwell's “demon” described earlier.

William suggests the <u>ideas</u> that this reverse universe would be akin to one’s reflection in a mirror, where all details are exactly the same, but where one dimension of space occurs in reverse <u>order</u>.  Where the Universe is concerned, the one dimension that is revered is not one of space, but of time.  To be clear, William is referring to a *quantitative* reversal, not a *qualitative* reversal, i.e. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5 becomes 5, 4, 3, 2, 1, not -1, -2, -3, -4 -5.

According to William, it can be proven that all the <u>laws</u> of physics <u>work</u> identically in bit cases, except one <u>law</u>, the 2nd <u>law</u> of <u>thermodynamics</u>, or that of entropy.  This is the single distinguishing feature of our ‘forward moving’ reality move in the direction does.  This means that, for example, the dissipation of <u>energy</u> as heat, the most dissipated form of <u>energy</u>, in *forward* world becomes the most concentrated source of <u>energy</u> in *reverse* world.  This also tells us that in the *reverse* world, all <u>energy</u> will eventually become concentrated into one point, or rather, the probability that all <u>energy</u> will ultimately concentrate into one point in *reverse* world is the same probability that a bowling ball will scatter the pins on impact in *forward* world.  William goes on to speculate that, if this is teh case, then there must be a time in the past when all <u>energy</u> was concentrated into one point or source.  Today we know this as teh <u>Big Bang</u> and black goles.

While the idea of <u>black holes</u> goes back to  Karl Schwarzschild, astronomer and college of Einstein, who came up with the <u>concept</u> of what would be called  “frozen stars” in 1916 after reading Einstein’s *Theory or Relativity* and warped space.  Here, 4 years after Schwarzschild’s hypothesis, William arrives as the same conclusions using only the 2<sup>nd</sup> <u>law</u> of <u>thermodynamics</u> as evidence, and goes on to describe the expanding universe 2 years before that <u>concept</u> was theorized by Friednmann, and the <u>Big Bang</u>, or what he called the *Great Collision*, 7 years before that idea was conceived in 1927 by Lemaître.  

William then goes on to conclude that the universe must have been created by two “halves” of the Universe, each a universe unto itself, both at rest and at 0&deg; in temperature, colliding into each other, and it was at this point only that the 2<sup>nd</sup> <u>law</u> of <u>thermodynamics</u> came into effect.   While this is not how modern <u>science</u> understands the <u>Big Bang</u>, his <u>ideas</u> were based purely on <u>reason</u>, and he came pretty close to what we understand today.  Given the questions that still remain unanswered, who can say that he won’t be proved correct in the future?  It is also interesting that his <u>ideas</u> are perfectly in-line with the <u>tholonic</u> <u>concept</u> of creation being two opposing forces, in its initial and all subsequent creation.

William posts the <u>ideas</u> that within this Universe, there exists instance where the 2nd <u>law</u> does exist in reverse.  This is not impossible, as the 2nd <u>law</u> is not actually a physical <u>law</u>, but rather a highly probable statistical result, and therefore, not being a <u>law</u>, is capable of being violated.  Where such a inversion of the <u>law</u> might exist, it would have the effect of reversing entropy, of concentrating <u>energy</u> rather that dispersing it.  William explains how and why this is a reasonable assumption, and even gives example of how we migth recognize such a process.  Today we know at least one way that can actually happen[^407], although how it happens is probably a bit different from the way William was suggesting.

<hr>


[^365]: Jared L. Manley, James Thurber. “Where Are They Now?” The New Yorker. The New Yorker, August 7, 1937. https://www.newyorker.com/magazine/1937/08/14/where-are-they-now-5. 
[^364]: https://archives.newyorker.com/newyorker/1937-08-14/flipbook/022
[^407]: Xing Xiu-San, “”Spontaneous entropy decrease and its statistical formula”, Department of Physics,Beijing Institute of Technology,Beijing ,China; https://arxiv.org/pdf/0710.4624.pdf

